---
layout: post
title: Pressing Pause on Theseus
---


I'll get right to the point. I'm putting the Theseus project on indefinite
hiatus pending interested collaborators.

I still believe in the project's importance and potential. There are powerful
ideas in here that I have not seen anywhere else. I don't expect non-experts to
recognize their significance without a working proof of concept, which is why
I've been working for several years on building just that. But I've been working
alone, slowly, while splitting my attention between this project, my full-time
job, several other side projects, and the rest of my life.

It's been slow going, and I've burned out on it several times. I don't know how
to properly convey how mentally and emotionally taxing it is to work alone on
such a large and difficult project. Every success is private; so is every
mistake. No one cares about either - not until you have a finished product that
they can see, use, and begin to understand in context. When all signs point
towards that finished product being years out, it can be hard to take any
satisfaction from the successes, and it can be hard to persevere through the
failures. At the same time, I've felt an overwhelming sense of guilt at not
having finished the whole thing sooner - a feeling which has tarnished every
other project I've tried to take on in parallel with Theseus. Frankly, I'm
surprised that I've been able to keep this up for so long.

In spite of the guilt, I have taken on a couple side projects over the last
year, and I've been startled both by how _fun_ they've been and how _easy_
they've felt relative to Theseus. Maybe this is unsurprising; unlike Theseus,
none of them have been preconditioned on original research, nor have they been
designed to resist state-level surveillance. In any case, these small successes
have opened my eyes to how much more I could be doing.

The project's social context has also changed - or at least, my view of it has.

[I wrote in early 2017]({% post_url 2017-02-17-theseus-robust-system-for-preserving %})
that the Trump administration's efforts at censoring climate research had
exposed a number of failings with our current academic and social institutions.
I still believe this, and I still believe that open access is a necessary
response to these failures. Necessary, but not sufficient.

True, this administration (and its counterparts around the world) use censorship
to further their goals, but they also use misinformation, distraction, and
appeals to toxic biases - racism, sexism, classism, xeonophobia, and all the
rest - to further those same goals. In many cases these latter methods of
control are much more effective, in part because to many people they are less
obvious. We are currently seeing the results of this throughout the
english-speaking world.

I'm not arrogant or conceited enough to claim to know what to do about this.
I've come to see that anti-censorship tools, while undeniably essential, are
only a very small part of a very large picture.

Frankly, this feels obvious in hindsight. You're probably rolling your eyes and
silently judging my naivete. Go ahead; you're not wrong.

It is easy to forget that just a few years ago the world looked very different.
Particularly for moderately privileged people like myself, it was easy to fall
into the trap of seeing the world's most pressing problems as abstract,
concerning ideas, and not as concrete, concerning lives.

I thought Theseus could matter; I still think that, but I also think I can spend
my time in other ways that could matter much more.

This doesn't mean the project is over. If I could find some interested
collaborators, I would be glad to pick this project back up at any time. I just
can't keep working on it alone.

I do still have some interesting unpublished results that I will be writing up
for this blog whenever I find the time. But my main hope for placing Theseus on
hiatus is to reclaim my free time (which this project has almost completely
consumed for the last several years), so it might be a while.

I really care about Theseus, and I don't want it to be over. That said, I am
trying to make a (rare) concession to practicality here. It's painful, but it
seems like the right thing to do.
