---
layout: post
title: Book Notes
tags: [book-notes]
---

Over this past couple years I've been lucky enough to find time in between classes and research to actually read for _fun_. I thought it might be even more fun to write a little on different books that've left strong impressions on me. It's nice to keep a record, but maybe I can also share some of the enjoyment I've gotten from them.

It was tempting to put the word "Reviews" somewhere in this headline, but I'm not really trying to review here. I'm not interested in just sharing ratings and terse little blurbs. Ratings are subjective and reductive, and it's hard to see much point in cooking them up in this context. I'd rather just share a few thoughts and impressions for each book with the hope that you'll find them interesting.

<br/>

_Pnin_ (Vladimir Nabokov): It's been a year or two since I finished this book, but it has stuck with me. The book takes the form of a sequence of tiny, self-contained episodes, in fact almost -- but not quite! -- a set of short stories. Their unifying thread is Pnin, the tragic hero, a Russian émigré to America fleeing "the Hitler war". Pnin is the absent-minded professor made full, the epitome of stereotype somehow rendered authentic. Nabokov, in creating him, has managed to both epitomize and transcend the archetype. Pnin starts out as someone absurd, someone to be laughed at -- when we first meet him, he is travelling to give a guest lecture, fussing over details while unwittingly boarding the wrong train -- but the longer we spend with him, the more we realize that Pnin himself is not to be ridiculed; rather, people's reactions to him are.

The fact (we come to see) is that poor, hapless, eccentric Pnin is a kind soul in an unkind world. As you read more and more, you find yourself almost involuntarily rooting for him to do well, to score some small victory. These victories are rare, though, and almost always inconsequential. Far more common are tragic mistakes and misunderstandings (told with Nabokov's characteristic wit, but no less heartbreaking for it). Throughout the book Pnin is put through greater and greater indignities, and yet he refuses to let them break him. He refuses to grow jaded and cynical towards this world even though it has given him little more than pain. Witnessing this, we are slowly brought around to a sort of awed respect for this strange little man, so naive, so awkward, and yet somehow utterly indomitable. Rare is the character whose failures are so inspiring. I found the book's final chapter deeply moving, and this is a book that I'm very much looking forward to someday reading again.

<br />

_Something Like an Autobiography_ (Akira  Kurosawa): I'm actually only halfway through this one, but I've come to like it so much that I can't resist including it. Kurosawa, for those who don't know, is almost certainly the most internationally famous Japanese film director. A number of my favorite movies are his (Kagemusha and Throne of Blood, to name two). But on top of his talents as a director, he also turns out to be a great, and disarmingly honest, storyteller, with an exceptional dry wit. The introduction lets you know that his autobiography only extends to around the time he started work on _Rashomon_, because everything else would be too recent for him to engage in full disclosure. At first I was disappointed by this, but the anecdoes he does provide are so engaging, and offer such an unexpectedly great level of insight into his character, that the book ends up being brilliant in spite of this restricted scope.

It's a bit funny to list this book below _Pnin_ and above _The Pale King_, since all three follow roughly similar episodic formats. _Something Like an Autobiography_ is composed of a long series of short anecdotes, most just a few pages long, recounting different moments from Kurosawa's life. Some are poignant, like his reflections on the "lost sounds" of his childhood. Others are funny, like when he recalls his "rebellious phase" in middle school. And some are utterly harrowing, like his description the Great Kanto Earthquake and his subsequent exploration, with his brother, of neighborhoods flattened and burnt to the ground, where they found piles of charred corpses and rivers so full of bloated death that they were running red-brown. But even in this passage, Kurosawa's account of what he saw, and (implicitly) of his relationship with his brother, is so compelling that it's impossible to stop reading. Notably, Kurosawa turns out to be a master of brief but vivid descriptions, of almost effortlessly calling up the spirit and image of a place, and so his stories serve not only as an account of his life but also as a historical record of the times in which he lived. I'd recommend this book to just about anyone, even if they couldn't care less about movies.

<br />

_The Pale King_ (David Foster Wallace): Published posthumously, there is something suffocatingly sad about the very existence of this book. I've read all of Wallace's published fiction, and a lot of it is very powerful, but nothing else hit me in quite the same way as this. Some context: Wallace only ever published two other novels, _The Broom of the System_ and _Infinite Jest_. Reading _The Broom of the System_, there are the occasional dull moments, and I'd have a hard time identifying anything I'd call the novel's emotional center -- and yet even so, the writing is so charismatic that it's hard to escape the impression that here is someone who, on the page, can do almost anything. Next up, _Infinite Jest_ manages to be incredibly emotionally powerful through its wrestling with themes of addiction, alienation, and the deep human need to find something to give ourselves away to. _Infinite Jest_ was written as a critique of its times, a narrative account thereof, a catalog of insanities (among other things), and yet it tries very hard to convince the reader that things don't have to be this way, that there is still good in the world.

After _Infinite Jest_'s publication, though, Wallace seemed to decide (perhaps based in part on the book's popular reception) that what he had provided was diagnosis without cure. _The Pale King_ was to be the book in which he corrected this mistake. His struggles to complete it are legendary, and a serious case of writer's block led (at least in part) to his decision to stop taking the psychoactive medication Nardil, since he suspected that it was numbing him emotionally in a way that prevented him from realizing his vision for _The Pale King_. He later went back on Nardil, but found that it had stopped working. This may have directly contributed to his tragic suicide in 2008.

This background necessarily colors how we see _The Pale King_. It stands unfinished: the cure didn't come soon enough. The novel is still rough around the edges, yet even so you can tell that it could have stood on par with -- or even surpassed -- his other work, had Wallace lived to finish it. It feels kind of gross to tie the author's real life into the novel's narrative, but in this case it's also irresistible, and the (involuntarily obtained) result is one of the most profound, crushing tragedies imaginable.

This is not the novel I'd recommend to someone who wants an introduction to Wallace (for these readers, _Good Old Neon_ and a few other titles come to mind). However, as a great admirer of Wallace's work, I personally found _The Pale King_ transfixing.

<br />

_Information Doesn't Want to Be Free_ (Cory Doctorow) ([previously](http://sohliloquies.blogspot.com/2016/02/you-cant-legislate-reality.html)): This is one of the best nontechnical books about  the internet I've ever read. Doctorow's overarching theme here is to put forward his "Three Laws", namely:

1. _Any time someone puts a lock on something and won't give you the key, that lock isn't there for your benefit._

2. _Fame won't make you rich, but you can't get paid without it._

3. _Information doesn't want to be free, people do._

Each law is meant as a statement on an issue he takes very seriously, and so it might seem at first like the book is forced into a sort of limited scope. This suspicion is natural, but completely mistaken. In expanding upon his chosen issues, Doctorow manages to draw connections to a head-spinning number of topics -- in fact, he pulls in so many different issues that it would feel disingenuous to try to give any list. There are chapters in here about the history of the music industry. There are chapters about how to find an audience and (hopefully!) make a living as an artist. There are chapters about digital rights management (or "digital locks"), and how these technologies lead to no-win situations. There are chapters about the TPP and the very serious dangers its copyright provisions pose. The list goes on. In everything he discusses, a common theme one begins to pick up on is that problems arise when we fail to put people at the center of our designs.

Every topic Doctorow touches on fits into the overall flow of his discussion almost effortlessly, and his arguments are invariably lucid and well-reasoned. I'd already heard of pretty much every issue he discusses, and yet I felt like I learned so much just by studying how he lays out his cases and picks examples. Doctorow's talent lies not just in his capacity to care deeply and passionately about these issues, but in his capacity to make you see why you should care, too. The world needs more people who can do that.

Another nice thing about _Information Doesn't Want to Be Free_: it's published through McSweeney's! You can buy it direct from their website, which is a nice break from the usual Amazon-induced guilt many of us associate with buying hard-to-find titles. I don't have a list of favorite companies to give money to, but if I did, I'd probably put McSweeney's pretty close to the top.
