---
layout: post
title: "Obsidian: A Constraint-Based System for Graphics Programming"
description: Obsidian gives you a terse, clear, expressive vocabulary for describing images with code and then rendering your descriptions.
---

# Preface

What's your greatest fear? Mine is making publication-grade vector graphics.

When I think about figures, I think in terms of shapes and arrangements. I want
to represent concepts with simple shapes, then arrange the shapes to reflect
relationships: some shapes contained within others, some grouped together in
rows or columns, some connected, some separated, and so on.

Once I've decided how I want things to look, then comes the hard part: figuring
out how to translate this mental model into a graphic design tool's
abstractions.

I think there must be a fundamental disconnect between the tools I've tried and
my own mindset. I'm always surprised by how much effort is involved in simple
tasks like aligning shapes, grouping them together, rearranging them, and so on.
Drawing even simple figures becomes repetitive, tedious, and error-prone.

Using these tools, the relationships between shapes often end up being implicit,
not explicit, and there always seems to come a point where I'll have to cover
for the tool's shortcomings through ugly hacks like hard-coding positions that
I've calculated by hand. The result ends up feeling just barely good enough, and
modifying it feels like playing jenga, where even the slightest movement could
instantly break everything.

What I want is a tool whose data model matches my mental model: a tool that
works in terms of shapes and arrangements.

Last December, I came across [a blog post about a system called Basalt](https://www.anishathalye.com/2019/12/12/constraint-based-graphic-design).
It seemed like just what I've always wanted: a terse API that lets the user
express relationships between shapes in terms of constraints which then get
passed off to an SMT solver. Since the solver is responsible for finding numeric
values for every shape's position and dimensions, the programmer is free to
define everything in clear, abstract terms, writing expressive code free from
magic numbers and letting the machine take care of the details. It's not a new
idea, but it is a good idea.

A few months later, I came up with a great use case for Basalt, but was
disappointed to realize that the library had never been released. I'm not sure
if it's still being developed - the author seems pretty busy - but the idea was
good enough that I thought, _hey, why not try and build this myself_?

I started out aiming for feature parity with the examples from that blog post,
but quickly found myself building the library out even further and finding ways
to simplify or improve on it. Pretty soon, my project had taken on a life of its
own.

I've been hacking on it for a couple weeks at this point. It's still definitely
a work in progress, but I think it's ready to share. Since the project is
inspired by "Basalt", I figure the name should be, too, and so I give you:
__Obsidian__.

# Introducing Obsidian

[Obsidian](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian) is a constraint-based system
for graphics programming. It lets you define groups of shapes, specify
relations between them, style them in any way supported by the SVG format, and
render them from that information alone.

The shapes and arrangements you specify get passed off to an SMT solver, which
does all the heavy lifting of computing shapes' relative and absolute positions.
This means that the relationships between shapes can take any form understood by
the solver, effectively allowing them to be arbitrarily complex. Forget about
"snap to guides" - we live in the future, we can do better than that.

The renderer currently supports PNG, SVG, and GIF (static or animated).

If you use Jupyter notebooks, you can also display rendered images natively
within your notebooks and even use Jupyter's IO widgets to interactively adjust
any shape parameters you'd like (e.g. dimensions, margins, font sizes, or
anything else you can derive an expression for).

The easiest way to understand how this all fits together is to see it in action.
Let's take a look at some code samples.

## Example: Circle and Square

This script generates a circle, inscribes a square inside it, and places them
both on a pleasant gray background.

This idea is borrowed from the start of the blog post I linked in the preface.
You might find it interesting to contrast that post's code with this one's (the
generated figures are pretty much identical).

```python
from obsidian import Canvas, Group, EQ
from obsidian.geometry import Circle, Rectangle, Point

SQRT_2 = 2**0.5

WIDTH = HEIGHT = 300

CIRCLE_STYLE = {"stroke": "#0000ff", "fill_opacity": "0"}
RECT_STYLE = {"stroke": "#ff0000", "fill_opacity": "0"}

circle = Circle(style=CIRCLE_STYLE)
square = Rectangle(style=RECT_STYLE)

g = Group([circle, square], [
    circle.center |EQ| square.center,
    circle.radius |EQ| WIDTH / 4,
    square.width |EQ| square.height,
    square.width |EQ| circle.radius * SQRT_2
])

canvas = Canvas(g, WIDTH, HEIGHT, bg_color="#e0e0e0")
canvas.save_png("gallery/circle_and_square.png")
canvas.save_svg("gallery/circle_and_square.svg")
```

This script produces the following image:

<img src="/assets/img/circle_and_square.svg">

Note the total absence of magic numbers in this script. In fact, it uses almost
no numbers at all. Instead, shapes are created, relationships between their
attributes are defined, and Obsidian takes it from there.

Don't get hung up on the unusual `|EQ|` syntax. More will be said on that below.
In brief, it's a way of using infix syntax with custom operators. The `EQ`
operator in particular represents an equality constraint. We use `EQ` rather
than `==` because the latter is generally expected to return a bool or bool-like
value, rather than an object representing an SMT formula.

## Example: Binary Counting

Here's another example that shows just how terse Obsidian can be. This one shows
the binary representations of the numbers 0 through 31:

```python
from obsidian import Canvas, Group, ShapeGrid, EQ
from obsidian.geometry import Rectangle

GRID_W = 5
GRID_H = 2**5
SPACING = 3

BG = "#000000"
RED = "#AA1010"
BLUE = "#3030AA"

squares = ShapeGrid(w=GRID_W, h=GRID_H, spacing=SPACING,
        factory=lambda: Rectangle(width=10, height=10))

for i, square in enumerate(squares.shapes):
    mask = 2 ** (GRID_W - 1 - (i % GRID_W))
    color = BLUE if (i // GRID_W) & mask else RED
    square.style = {"fill": color}

canvas_w = squares.bounds.width + 2*SPACING
canvas_h = squares.bounds.height + 2*SPACING
canvas = Canvas(squares, canvas_w, canvas_h, bg_color=BG)
canvas.save_png("gallery/square_grid.png")
canvas.save_svg("gallery/square_grid.svg")
```

And here's the output:

<img src="/assets/img/square_grid.svg">

This example makes use of Obsidian's built-in `ShapeGrid` class. This is a
special kind of `Group` which knows how to generate the necessary constraints to
arrange shapes into rows and columns with uniform spacing. Helper classes like
this allow us to keep Obsidian scripts terse and expressive.

Note that the canvas's width and height don't need to be specified explicitly -
they'll be derived and converted to integers once the solver determines values
for `squares.bounds.width` and `squares.bounds.height`. Note also that `squares`
is centered in the canvas by default; this is a convenience feature provided by
`Canvas`, and can be adjusted or disabled as desired.

## Example: Go Board

Here's a third example - this one's my favorite:

<img src="/assets/img/go_board.svg">

This Go board is defined, populated with stones, and rendered
[in just 177 lines of code](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian/blob/master/examples/go_board.py),
roughly a quarter of which are spent on docstrings, comments, and the
specification of the board position (the script accepts an arbitrary position,
[passed in as ASCII art](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian/blob/master/examples/go_board.py#L149)).

This example is built around a class called `GoBoard`, which looks something
like this (some methods omitted for brevity - the interesting stuff all happens
in `__init__`):

```python
class GoBoard:
    BG_STYLE = {"fill": "#f2b06d"}
    LINE_STYLE = {"stroke": "#101010", "stroke_width": 1}
    TEXT_STYLE = {"fill": "#000000"}

    def __init__(self, width, height, inset, rows=19, cols=19, font_size=15, margin_between_stones=3):
        assert 7 <= rows <= 50
        assert 7 <= cols <= 50

        # initialize properties, and get local references for some of them
        self.rows = rows
        self.cols = cols
        self.font_size = font_size
        self.constraints = constraints = []
        self.bg = Rectangle(0, 0, width, height, self.BG_STYLE)
        self.stones = []

        # derive stone radius from distance between adjacent intersections
        intersection_distance = min((width - 2*inset) / cols,
                                    (height - 2*inset) / rows)
        self.stone_radius = (intersection_distance - margin_between_stones) / 2

        # create points for the 4 corners of the board's grid
        top_left = Point(inset, inset)
        bot_left = Point(inset, height-inset)
        top_right = Point(width-inset, inset)
        bot_right = Point(width-inset, height-inset)

        # make lists of points evenly distributed along each edge of the board
        top_points = [Point() for _ in range(cols)]
        left_points = [Point() for _ in range(rows)]
        right_points = [Point() for _ in range(rows)]
        bottom_points = [Point() for _ in range(cols)]
        constraints.append(evenly_spaced(top_left, top_right, top_points))
        constraints.append(evenly_spaced(top_left, bot_left, left_points))
        constraints.append(evenly_spaced(top_right, bot_right, right_points))
        constraints.append(evenly_spaced(bot_left, bot_right, bottom_points))

        # draw a line between each opposing pair of points
        h_lines = [Line(p1, p2, self.LINE_STYLE) for p1, p2 in zip(left_points, right_points)]
        v_lines = [Line(p1, p2, self.LINE_STYLE) for p1, p2 in zip(top_points, bottom_points)]
        self.h_lines = h_lines
        self.v_lines = v_lines

        # mark the board's "star points"
        self.star_points = star_points = []
        for row in self.get_star_lines(rows):
            for col in self.get_star_lines(cols):
                intersection = self.get_intersection(row, col)
                star_point = Rectangle(width=5, height=5, style={"fill": "#000000"})
                star_points.append(star_point)
                constraints.append(star_point.center |EQ| intersection)

        # annotate the grid rows
        self.grid_coords = grid_coords = []
        for row, pt in enumerate(left_points):
            anchor = Point(inset/2 - 1, pt.y - 3)
            s = str(rows - row)
            grid_coords.append(self.make_text(s, anchor))

        # annotate the grid columns
        col_letters = "ABCDEFGHJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghjklmnopqrstuvwxyz"  # no I (as is conventional)
        for letter, pt in zip(col_letters, bottom_points):
            anchor = Point(pt.x, height - inset/2)
            grid_coords.append(self.make_text(letter, anchor))

    def get_intersection(self, row, col):
        """
        Returns the intersection of the given row and col as a Point.
        """
        x = self.v_lines[col].pt1.x
        y = self.h_lines[row].pt1.y
        return Point(x, y)

    @staticmethod
    def get_star_lines(size):
        ...  # returns offsets for star points (eg [2, 4, 6] on 9x9)

    def make_black_stone(self):
        return Circle(radius=self.stone_radius, style={"stroke": "black", "stroke_width": 1.3, "fill": "#000000"})

    def make_white_stone(self):
        return Circle(radius=self.stone_radius, style={"stroke": "black", "stroke_width": 1.3, "fill": "#FFFFFF"})

    def make_text(self, string, anchor):
        return Text(string, self.font_size, anchor, GoBoard.TEXT_STYLE)

    def add_stone(self, player, row, col):
        ...  # makes a stone, positions it, and appends it to self.stones

    def get_group(self):
        shapes = [self.bg]
        shapes += self.h_lines
        shapes += self.v_lines
        shapes += self.star_points
        shapes += self.grid_coords
        shapes += self.stones
        return Group(shapes, self.constraints)
```

This is a bit longer than the earlier examples, but I'm including it anyway to
show how well Obsidian's idiomatic patterns hold up in this more complex
context. Note how list comprehensions and helper functions like `evenly_spaced`
allow each section of the program to remain terse and expressive. Here, too,
there is a total lack of magic numbers.[^1]

[^1]: Aside, arguably, from the offsets on the Text anchor points - but getting text to look right always seems to take a little bit of magic :)

Interestingly, the series of steps followed in `__init__` is just the same as
how one might draw a board by hand: mark the corners, identify the edges,
distribute points evenly along each edge, form a grid by connecting opposite
pairs of points with lines, place markings on certain grid intersections, then
add annotations on the edges of the board.

The fact that this process aligns perfectly with how we might describe (or even
imagine) the layout of a Go board is a strong indicator that we've found a
system which closely mirrors our mental models.

What's more, since this description is generic, it is also flexible. It works
perfectly well for traditional board sizes (9x9, 13x13, 19x19), but it is by no
means limited to them. In fact, offering a class which supports (say) arbitrary
row and column counts _is exactly as easy_ as supporting the most common sizes.

As a result, this class's `__init__` method accepts a number of parameters.
Finding the ideal values for these parameters is an iterative process. How can
we iterate as quickly and easily as possible? Enter Jupyter.

If you haven't used Jupyter before, you're missing out. Jupyter's interface is
great for the sort of interactive coding you do when drawing Obsidian figures,
and figures can be rendered directly within the notebook. Not only that, but
Jupyter provides widgets that can be used to manipulate render parameters. Look
at this:

<video src="/assets/vid/interactive-board.mp4" controls loop muted></video>

Note that `go_board.py` required _no modifications whatsoever_ in order for this
to work. The Jupyter notebook ([which you can view here](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian/blob/master/examples/go_board_interactive.ipynb))
simply starts with `import go_board`, wraps `go_board`'s methods with some
interactive widgets, and returns the result. That's all you need to do.

Why might you want this? Well, in practically every graphic design project,
there comes a point where you're spending most of your time tweaking a handful
of parameters and seeing how you like the results. The faster you can see and
compare the results of those tweaks, the more productive you'll be - and it's
hard to imagine getting much faster than this.

# Design

OK, now that you've seen Obsidian in action, let's take a look under the hood.

## Shapes

Obsidian is built around the concept of the `Shape`. Every `Shape` has two
useful attributes: `bounds` (consisting of four edges) and `center`.

By default, `center` is simply computed as: `Point((left_edge + right_edge) / 2, (top_edge + bottom_edge) / 2)`

Almost every class in Obsidian is a [dataclass](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html).
In particular, all `Shape` subclasses should be dataclasses. The relevant idioms
are on display in [`obsidian/geometry.py`](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian/blob/master/obsidian/geometry.py).

For instance, here's how the `Point` class is defined:

```python
@dataclass
class Point(Shape):
    x: REAL = SMTField()
    y: REAL = SMTField()
    style: STYLE = StyleField()

    @property
    def bounds(self):
        x, y = self.x, self.y
        return Bounds(x, x, y, y)  # just a point!
```

And here's `Circle`:

```python
@dataclass
class Circle(Shape):
    x: REAL = SMTField()
    y: REAL = SMTField()
    radius: REAL = SMTField()
    style: STYLE = StyleField()

    @property
    def bounds(self):
        left_edge, right_edge = self.x - self.radius, self.x + self.radius
        top_edge, bottom_edge = self.y - self.radius, self.y + self.radius
        return Bounds(left_edge, right_edge, top_edge, bottom_edge)
```

The `@dataclass` decorator automatically creates `__init__` methods for these
classes based on their annotated fields. You can read about the details of how
this works [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html). Any
argument that is not supplied will be initialized to a default value; for
anything marked as `SMTField`, this default value will be a fresh, unique free
variable from the SMT solver which can be used in any constraint.

## Groups

The `Group` is a special type of `Shape` representing a collection of other
`Shape`s (potentially including other `Group`s). By default, a `Group` defines
its bounds in terms of the `min`s and `max`es of its members' bounds.

`Group` can be subclassed to create composite shapes (like
`obsidian.symbols.XorSymbol`) or semi-structured shape containers (like
`obsidian.shape.ShapeGrid`).

## Canvases

When you want to render a `Group`, you put it on a `Canvas`. In the simplest
case, this looks like so:

```python
group = Group([...], [...])
canvas = Canvas(group)
canvas.save_png("/tmp/file.png")
```

Used this way, Canvas will:

* Set its own width and height as equal to `group`'s width and height

* Center-align `group` like so: `group.center |EQ| Point(width/2, height/2)`

* Pass the constraints to the SMT solver and get a solution, if any exists

* Use the solved model to render every shape from `group.shapes` in order

* Store the rendered image as `canvas.rendered`

* Save `canvas.rendered` as a PNG at the given path, i.e. `/tmp/file.png`

If any of that is not what you want, you can override it. For instance, you can
have Canvas align the group to any corner, or have it leave alignment entirely
up to you. You can pass integers for `width` and `height`, or express them in
terms of the SMT solver's free variables (e.g. `width = group.bounds.width +
10`).

`Canvas.render()` offers keyword arguments for two different forms of caching:
it can store a solved model, and it can keep a cache of solved variables'
values. These are very basic features that I've included to try to speed up
complex renders. They're not fancy, but they help. See the docstring for
details.


## Dependencies

Obsidian uses pySMT to express constraints and feed them to a solver.
All constraints are expressed in pySMT-native format, which effectively means
that they're all instances of `pysmt.fnode.FNode`. As the user, you don't really
need to know this unless you're writing type annotations or getting serious
about optimization.

For rendering, Obsidian uses a little library called `drawSvg`. This provides a
layer of abstraction on top of Cairo (which is also required). `drawSvg` is
small, nearly undocumented, and sort of eccentric, but it has all the features I
want and offers them through a fairly terse interface, so I'm happy with it for
now.[^2]

[^2]: Ordinarily, Obsidian users will never have to touch `drawSvg`; however, you will need to use it if you want to generate animations, since the Canvas APIs currently only generate single frames.

## Aligning Shapes

Some utility functions are provided to help with aligning shapes. Each of these
functions generates a single, possibly complex constraint. For instance:

```python
def top_align(shapes):
    s = FreshSymbol(REAL)
    return And(Equals(shape.bounds.top_edge, s) for shape in shapes)
```

This constrains all the shapes' top edges to the same value, effectively setting
them equal to each other. This and `left_align` are used by `ShapeGrid`.

```python
def evenly_spaced(start_point, end_point, shapes):
    n = len(shapes)
    assert n > 1
    constraints = []
    for i in range(n):
        j = n - i - 1
        x = (start_point.x*j + end_point.x*i) / (n-1)
        y = (start_point.y*j + end_point.y*i) / (n-1)
        constraints.append(Equals(shapes[i].x, x))
        constraints.append(Equals(shapes[i].y, y))
    return And(constraints)
```

This sets the `x` and `y` attributes of the objects in `shapes` such that the
shapes are evenly distributed on a line between `start_point` and `end_point`.
You can see this function in action within `GoBoard.__init__()`.

## Infix Operators

This is one of the more unusual parts of Obsidian.

First, a little background.

By default, Python functions use a form of _prefix notation_: a function `F` of
two arguments `a, b` is written `F(a, b)`. However, certain built-in operators
use _infix notation_: for instance, we write `1 + 1` rather than `+ 1 1`,
placing the `+` operator between, not ahead of, its arguments.

Python has a number of built-in infix operators, but does not offer any way to
define new ones. This is unfortunate, since just about everyone prefers to write
math in infix notation.

There are two options here. The first is to repurpose a built-in infix operator.
For example, Python doesn't let you override the `==` operator itself, but it
does let you provide your own `__eq__` methods which behave however you want.

Technically this _could_ be used to make the expression `smt_var_1 == smt_var_2`
return a constraint.[^3] This approach has some drawbacks, though. For instance,
[`__eq__` and related methods](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__eq__)
have [some convoluted semantics](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3588776/how-is-eq-handled-in-python-and-in-what-order)
which only really make sense in the context of boolean comparisons.

Another downside is that we lose the ability to actually use `==` in its
intended way: to compare variables by value. Since Python objects are True by
default, a conditional like `if smt_var_1 == smt_var_2:` would _always_ execute,
even if the two variables are distinct. Similarly, by default `smt_var_1 !=
smt_var_2` would always be False for _any_ pair of free variables, since its
default implementation is simply `return not self.__eq__(other)`.

We could still compare by reference (e.g. `smt_var_1 is smt_var_2`) but this is
fragile and leaves us inconveniently dependent on assumptions about our SMT
library's implementation.

[^3]: This is, for instance, the option that Basalt appears to have chosen.

Luckily, there's another option. Check out this excerpt from
`obsidian/infix.py`:

```python
class Infix:
    """
    Cute little hack for defining custom infix operators.
    Attrib: https://code.activestate.com/recipes/384122/#c5
    Usage:

    >>> import operator
    >>> mul = Infix(operator.mul)
    >>> 4 |mul| 4
    16
    >>> div = Infix(operator.truediv)
    >>> 8 |div| (2 |div| 2)
    8.0
    """

    def __init__(self, f):
        self.f = f

    def __ror__(self, other):
        return Infix(lambda x: self.f(other, x))

    def __or__(self, other):
        return self.f(other)
```

This customizes the `|` operator, which has simpler semantics than `==` and is
expected to return non-boolean values. This doesn't really define any new infix
operators - evaluation proceeds like `(4 | mul) | 4`, with `|` as the infix
operator in both steps - but it allows us to write custom operators in a way
which mimics infix notation.

At first glance this syntax may look unusual, but it allows us to keep using
`==` in the intended way, avoiding the confusion of having `a == b` sometimes
returning something other than a `bool`.

Obsidian defines infix operators for equality and inequality: `obsidian.EQ` and
`obsidian.NE`. These are the only operators I've found myself needing so far,
since our SMT solver library (`pySMT`) already supports infix arithmetic (eg `var_1 =
var_2 + 5`) and infix boolean conjunctions (eg `formula_1 = formula_2 &
formula_3`).

`EQ` and `NE` accept any pySMT expression; they also accept `obsidian.Point`
instances. `point_1 |EQ| point_2` is equivalent to `(point_1.x |EQ| point_2.x) &
(point_1.y |EQ| point_2.y)`.

Note that while we do lean on the `|` operator for this special behavior, we
don't have to override its default behavior to do so. This is because our
special behavior is only triggered when one of `|`'s arguments is an `Infix`
instance. Absent `Infix`, `|` behaves normally.

You may be wondering why we're using `|`. Two reasons: first, it looks cool;
second, in Python's [operator precedence ordering](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#evaluation-order),
`|` is the next operator after `==`, meaning that your intuitions about operator
precedence for `==` will (almost)[^4] always apply to `|EQ|` as well.

[^4]: Here's the only difference: there are a handful of operators that hold equal precedence to `==` but take precedence over `|`. They are: `in`, `not in`, `is`, `is not`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`, `!=`. Fortunately, none of these operators tend to show up in the same expressions as `|EQ|` constraints, so this isn't something you ever really have to worry about.

There is one tiny limitation to this notation.

Python allows programmers to write three-way comparisons like `a == b == c`. The
interpreter evaluates these the way a novice programmer would expect, i.e. `(a
== b) and (b == c)`, rather than evaluating it in the way programmers coming
from a background in less helpful languages might expect, i.e. as `(a == b) ==
c`. Unfortunately `a |EQ| b |EQ| c` follows the latter semantics, not the
former.

The reason for this behavior is just that it keeps the implementation of `Infix`
simple. If anyone is interested in working on lifting this limitation, I have
some ideas on how it could be done and would be glad to work with you on this.

# Next Steps

Obsidian is a work in progress. It's usable - I've been using it - but there is
still room for improvement and expansion.

## Speed

Simple figures render instantly; complex ones may take longer. If you have a
figure with thousands of shapes (and thus thousands of free variables), renders
might take at least a few seconds.

Here are some tricks you can use to improve performance:

* If you're rendering the same arrangement of shapes with different styles (e.g.
  for an animation), you can use a cache to speed things up; see
  `Canvas.render()`'s docstring for details.

* Every constraint object comes with a `.simplify()` method. Simplifying complex
  constraints may speed up your overall render time. If you're working in
  Jupyter, you can use `%time` to benchmark any step in your script, which can
  tell you whether or not your simplifications are helping. If you want to
  simplify a list of constraints, pass them to `pysmt.shortcuts.And` first.

* If you are subclassing Group and making heavy use of your custom group's
  `bounds` attribute, you may see performance benefits from overriding the
  default implementation of `bounds`. The default looks at every sub-shape's
  bounds and takes `min`s and `max`es across them; you can likely find a more
  efficient way of deriving for this data.

Before this project I'd never touched an SMT solver, so I'm sure there are all
sorts of improvements that I've missed. I'd be really interested to get input
from anyone who has more background in this area.

## Variety

I've just been adding things to this library as I've needed (or wanted) them. If
you find yourself using this, you'll likely want to do the same. Please feel
free to do so and submit pull requests!

Just for reference: I've been collecting basic geometric shapes under
`geometry.py`, text and symbols under `symbols.py`, and helper functions for
nontrivial constraints under `arrange.py`. Abstract helper groups like ShapeGrid
live in `groups.py`. This layout is sort of ad-hoc, but it has worked so far.

We're missing some pretty obvious features (e.g. arrows, arcs, a helper for
multi-segment lines), mostly just because my free time is finite, but at some
point down the road I would expect us to reach feature parity with SVG.

In addition, it'd be cool to add more functionality to the shapes we have
(for example, there's no reason why we couldn't, say, support vector math with
Line instances, and I can think of a few situations where that could be really
useful). Again, I've just been adding things as I need them, so there's plenty
left to do here.

## Flexibility

Currently we're letting `pySMT` decide what solver to use. It might be a good
idea to let the user override this behavior. I don't know enough about solvers
to have strong opinions here; I would be very interested to hear other folks'
takes on this.

## drawSvg

This library has everything we need, but it also has some eccentricities, and it
lacks any API documentation beyond the repo's `README.md`. I know, that's not
great. We could either bring in a different dependency if anyone knows another
one with feature parity (including Jupyter rendering), or we could contribute
some docs to `drawSvg`. I'd lean towards the latter option.

Another note on `drawSvg`: currently, it positions the coordinate system's
origin in the canvas's bottom-left corner, with the positive y-direction
pointing upwards. Obsidian follows the convention more commonly found in
interactive graphics software, where the origin is in the top-left and the
positive y-direction points downwards. This requires our renderers in
`canvas.py` to finesse our y-coordinates somewhat for the sake of compatibility.

`drawSvg` allows the user to move the origin, but not to invert the y-axis; it
would be nice if they supported that inversion and added a flag to apply all the
necessary changes to convert from one coordinate system to the other. This isn't
strictly needed - Obsidian's renderer can, and does, handle this on its own -
but it would be a cool feature for `drawSvg` to have, and it would make
Obsidian's code a lot cleaner, too.

I also wonder whether drawSvg's render times could be sped up. This could be
interesting to look at down the road, perhaps once we've reached the point of
diminishing returns with Obsidian's own internal optimizations.

## pySMT

`drawSvg` isn't the only library with eccentricities. `pySMT` has a minor bug
which actually prevents our infix operators from working unless we patch it
at runtime. The issue has to do with how Python handles operators like `|`. I
won't go into the full details here - you can read about them [in the comment
block above Obsidian's patch](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian/blob/master/obsidian/__init__.py#L15)
in `__init__.py`.

This is a minor bug, but it might be nice to draw up and submit a bugfix so we
can remove that weird patch from `obsidian.__init__`.

## Styling and Animation

Currently, complex style information (e.g. gradients) has to be expressed
through drawSvg's APIs. Ditto for animations: Obsidian can render individual
frames, but collecting them into (say) a GIF requires importing from drawSvg. I
haven't seen any benefit to wrapping this functionality, but something about
exposing our dependencies to end user code seems strange, so I thought I'd call
it out here.

## Unit Tests

It would be nice to have some unit tests. Currently I'm treating the scripts in
`examples/` as tests, re-running them after any big changes and making sure they
still look right - this works, but it's not ideal. I've been meaning to spend
some time figuring out the best way to automate this process (or, even better,
replace it with something more rigorous), but haven't gotten around to it yet.

## More Examples

I'm happy with the examples Obsidian has, but I'd like to write (or see) more.

It'd be interesting to see how terse we can get with scripts for simple
geometric patterns like the Petersen graph or a Fibonacci spiral.

Circuit diagrams could be another fun challenge. In a similar vein, I'd like to
take a crack at reproducing the sorts of wire diagrams you always find in books
and articles on computer architecture, since that's something I think Obsidian
could do exceptionally well (and something touched on in the examples from the
blog post linked in the Preface).

Some more interactive examples would be nice, as would examples of animations
or examples with more complex styling.

I've got plenty of ideas for examples of all complexity levels and would be
happy to workshop these with anyone who feels like making a contribution.

# Conclusion

Obsidian gives you a terse, clear, expressive vocabulary for describing images
with code and then rendering your descriptions. It lets you harness the full
power of modern SMT solvers to generate figures based on constraints which can
be as simple or complex as you like. It is designed to be easy to use, easy to
read, and easy to extend.

[The full codebase is open source](https://github.com/wootfish/obsidian).
Contributions are invited, and if you found this interesting, feel free to
[get in touch](https://eli.sohl.com/contact)!

<hr>
